Mooreds/add progressive delivery blog post (#4272)
FusionAuth/fusionauth-site: astro/src/content/blog/progressive-delivery.mdx

---
publish_date: 2026-05-01
title: Identity and Progressive Delivery
description: Progressive delivery is the idea that instead of dumping a release of software onto your users, you allow them to control when new features get rolled out. How does identity play a role in this new software delivery concept?
authors: Dan Moore
image: /img/blogs/zero-trust-idps/zero-trust-and-how-idps-factor-into-it-header-image.png
categories: Education
tags: progressive delivery, jwt, lambda, self-service account, user search
excerpt_separator: "{/* more */}"
---

Progressive delivery is the idea that instead of dumping a release of software onto your users, you allow them to control when new features are rolled out. It separates the deployment of software from feature enablement. This minimizes user impact, which is termed "jerk".

{/* more */}

> I recently hosted a webinar with Adam Zimmer, one of the co-authors of ["Progressive Delivery"](https://progressivedelivery.com/). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I recently hosted a webinar with Adam Zimman, one of the co-authors of ["Progressive Delivery"](https://progressivedelivery.com/). 
```

Reviewer 2: Damn. I was hoping you could get me a signed movie poster from your brother Hans.

> We covered a wide range of topics, from Voyager One still receiving software updates to how BMW used feature flagging to comply with local laws. You can watch the [webinar here](/webinar/progressive-delivery-and-the-role-of-identity-ship-features-with-confidence).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We covered a wide range of topics, from Voyager One still receiving software updates to how BMW used feature flagging to comply with regional laws. You can watch the [webinar here](/webinar/progressive-delivery-and-the-role-of-identity-ship-features-with-confidence).
```

Identity is a critical part of progressive delivery. Adam covers two aspects of this in the webinar, and I wanted to dig into it more.

> The first is that you need to be able to group your users. For example, Dan might be a beta user who wants all new features rolled out immediately, while Adam is a laggard who prefers a stable feature set, with any changes introduced slowly. This categorization is tied to user identity. It can be stored in one or more user attributes. Then you can build your application to enable certain features for certain categories of users. The book calls this "progressive rollout".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first is that you need to be able to group your users. For example, Dan might be a beta user who wants all new features rolled out immediately, while Adam wants a more stable and consistent user experience, with any changes introduced slowly (or after they are more throughly tested but early adopters in production). This categorization is tied to user identity. It can be stored in one or more user attributes. Then you can build your application to enable certain features for certain categories of users. The book calls this "progressive rollout".
```

Reviewer 2: If you go with this option, `s/but/by/`

The second aspect is allowing users to opt in to certain categories, either as an individual user choosing a certain level of new features, or as an organization admin doing the same on behalf of their team. This dispersion of authority to determine when features are enabled is called "radical delegation".

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Identity is a critical part of progressive delivery. Adam covers two aspects of this in the webinar:

* **group your users**: Dan might be a beta user who wants all new features rolled out immediately, while Adam prefers a slower, stable feature set. You can store these preferences in one or more user attributes. Then you can build your application to enable certain features for certain categories of users. The book calls this "progressive rollout".

* **allow users to opt in to certain categories**: an individual user might want access to one set of new features (e.g. a new UI on a certain page), or an organization admin could do the same for their entire team. This dispersion of authority to determine when features are enabled is called "radical delegation".

```
suggestion: make these two aspects more obvious with bulleted lists and parallel construction. add a grounded example for radical delegation since it's a bit more abstract and might be harder for users to understand

> Let's talk about how this would work.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
suggestion: remove unnecessary transition

Author: Thanks. I prefer a bit of a folksy tone, so leaving in. (For docs, would definitely remove.

## High Level Architecture

Here's a high level diagram of how a user would interact with an application architected for progressive delivery.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## High-Level Architecture

Here's a high-level diagram of how a user would interact with an application architected for progressive delivery:

```
suggestion: hyphenate adjective phrases like 'high-level' (notably, we _shouldn't_ hyphenate this when used as a noun)
suggestion: introduce diagrams and images with colons

```mermaid title="Progressive delivery interactions."
sequenceDiagram
  participant U as User
  participant A as Application
  participant F as FusionAuth / IdP
  participant FM as Feature management server

  U->>A: Login request
  A->>F: Authenticate user
  F-->>A: JWT with rollout_level claim
  A-->>U: Session established
  A->>FM: Check feature flags
  FM-->>A: Flag values for user tier
  A-->>U: Render features per tier
```

> When a user logs in, the application forwards the authentication request to FusionAuth or another auth server. FusionAuth validates the credentials and returns a signed JWT. That JWT contains a `rollout_level` claim, which is an attribute that indicates which tier of features they should receive (for example, alpha, beta, or GA). This pattern could also be used for longer-lived groupings, such as geography or pricing tier.

Reviewer 2: Should we mention that the application auth request must explicitly request that claim? or is that too much in the weeds?

Author: The application doesn't need to explicitly request the claim, but FusionAuth does need to explicitly add that using a lambda. Will update.

> With the session established, the application passes the `rollout_level` to the feature management server, which evaluates the claim and returns the appropriate flag values for that user's level. The application renders the features that match, ensuring that new functionality is progressively exposed based on user attributes rather than a blanket release to all users.

Reviewer 2: I imagine a lot of applications won't bother with a feature management server like this, as long as the features aren't dangerous or secret. Should we explicitly mention that this is the 'industrial strength' option, and you could handle this in your application with a module, even do it server-side if you want? (or, maybe this is an opportunity to plug Permify's fine-grained permissions, which you could surely use for this use case?)

Author: In the webinar we actually talk about some of the benefits of a feature management server, but I like the idea of mentioning options (I'm guessing there are simpler feature management frameworks someone could use).

## FusionAuth Implementation

Let's dig in a bit more into how FusionAuth can help with this kind of rollout plan.

> The first step is identifying users by desired feature rollout. Add attributes to the user in the `user.data` field. In the example above, you can see that `rollout_level` is used. The value is a tier like alpha, beta, or GA, but you could use numbers if you need more granularity.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The first step is identifying users by desired feature rollout. To do this, you'll add attributes to the user in the `user.data` field. The example above uses `rollout_level`, with a value corresponding to a tier like alpha, beta, or GA, but you could use numbers if you need more granularity.
```
Suggestion: minor wording improvements (passive -> active voice, add a transition at the beginning of the second sentence)

### Controlling The Attribute

> There are several ways to control `rollout_level`. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are several ways to control `rollout_level`:
```
best to use a colon when introducing a list

* user self-service, where the user controls their level
* admin control, where an admin user can assign a level to a user
* groups, where groups have the rollout level and you can add a user to a group to ahve them get that rollout level
* tenants, where an entire set of users in a tenant are assigned the same rollout level

Let's look at each of these and how you'd implement them in FusionAuth.

> For user self-service, expose it to end users via [account self-service](/docs/lifecycle/manage-users/account-management/). `rollout_level` is just one more form field the user can adjust. You ask them what level of feature rollout they prefer. When using FusionAuth's self-service account pages, you can theme them just as you want. If you are building your own account pages, just use the [SDKs](/docs/sdks) to set this value in FusionAuth.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For user self-service, expose it to end users via [account self-service](/docs/lifecycle/manage-users/account-management/). `rollout_level` is just one more form field the user can adjust. You ask them what level of feature rollout they prefer. You can use FusionAuth's self-service account pages, or build your own account pages that use the [SDKs](/docs/sdks) to set this value in FusionAuth.
```
Suggestion: Took me a minute to figure out why we brought up theming here, personally i think it disrupts the flow between the two alternative implementations so we're better off without it.

You can also manage this at the group level by associating a rollout tier with a specific group and placing users into it accordingly. You'll need to use the API or an SDK to set the group rollout tier. Here's an example of such code:

```bash
#!/bin/bash

FUSIONAUTH_URL="https://your-instance.fusionauth.io"
API_KEY="your-api-key"
GROUP_ID="$1"
ROLLOUT_LEVEL="$2"

if [[ -z "$GROUP_ID" || -z "$ROLLOUT_LEVEL" ]]; then
  echo "Usage: $0 <group-id> <alpha|beta|GA>"
  exit 1
fi

curl -s -X PATCH "$FUSIONAUTH_URL/api/group/$GROUP_ID" \
  -H "Authorization: $API_KEY" \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d "{
    \"group\": {
      \"data\": {
        \"rollout_level\": \"$ROLLOUT_LEVEL\"
      }
    }
  }"
```

which results in a group that looks like this (check out the `data` object):

```json
{
  "group": {
    "data": {
      "rollout_level": "beta"
    },
    "id": "2b51db04-ceed-46ec-8506-73548a32c163",
    "insertInstant": 1777507062503,
    "lastUpdateInstant": 1777507081106,
    "name": "beta_users",
    "roles": {},
    "tenantId": "bafb4319-b7ca-ed27-fa2f-bbdba9d8ec06"
  }
}
```

> Finally, you can also set this value for an entire tenant. If you're using a logical multi-tenant architecture, use the `tenant.data` field to store the `rollout_level`.

Reviewer 2: "logical multi-tenant architecture" is a big phrase to throw out there with no explanation -- should we define it? or maybe skip it, if we don't care to define it here (could be another blog post!)
